Create RFC for MIR linker (#1600)
model-checking/kani: rfcs/src/rfcs/0001-mir-linker.md

- **Feature Name:** `MIR` Linker (mir_linker)
- **RFC Tracking Issue**: <https://github.com/model-checking/kani/issues/1588>
- **RFC PR:** <https://github.com/model-checking/kani/pull/1600>
- **Status:** Under Review
- **Version:** 0

-------------------

## Summary

> Fix linking issues with the rust standard library in a scalable manner by only generating `goto-program` for

Reviewer: Another nit: I'd use "goto-program(s)" (see [CBMC docs](http://cprover.diffblue.com/group__goto-programs.html)) instead since `goto-program` is not a tool or module. You frequently say "`goto-program` model" but I think "goto-program" and "goto model" are the same thing.

code that is reachable from the user harnesses.

## User Impact

The main goal of this RFC is to enable Kani users to link against all supported constructs from the `std` library.
Currently, Kani will only link to items that are either generic or have an inline annotation.

The approach introduced in this RFC will have the following secondary benefits.
- Reduce spurious warnings about unsupported features for cases where the feature is not reachable from any harness.
- In the verification mode, we will likely see a reduction on the compilation time and memory consumption

>  by pruning the inputs of symtab2gb and goto-instrument.

Reviewer: You mean in the verification stage? Are `symtab2gb` and `goto-instrument` called then?

Author: I was trying to make a distinction with the `assess mode` which might not invoke CBMC.

  - Linking against the standard library goto-models takes more than 5 GB which is not feasible with the current

>   GitHub workers.

Reviewer 2: Just confirming this sentence is talking about the alternative approach, not the "mir linker" approach you're recommending?

Author: Yes

Author: I fixed the text. I can see why it was confusing. :)

- In a potential assessment mode, only analyze code that is reachable from all public items in the target crate.

> One downside is that our release bundle will be bigger.

Author: Approx 26MB bigger for linux 64bits. Kani 0.9 bundle size was 22MB. So this will more than double the size. That said, we also download the entire rustup toolchain as part of `kani setup` and I believe it has more than 50MB.

> One downside is that our release bundle will be bigger.

Author: Changed the text a bit. Let me know if it's clearer now.

We are going to include compilation artifacts for the `std` and `kani` libraries.
This will negatively impact the time taken to set up Kani
(triggered by either the first time a user invokes `kani | cargo-kani` , or explicit invoke the subcommand `setup`).

## User Experience

Once this RFC has been stabilized users shall use Kani in the same manner as they have been today.
Until then, we wil add an unstable option `--mir-linker` to enable the cross-crate reachability analysis
and the generation of the `goto-program` model only when compiling the target crate.

Kani setup will likely take longer and more disk space as mentioned in the section above.
This change will not be guarded by `--mir-linker` option above.

## Detailed Design

In a nutshell, we will no longer generate a `goto-program` model for every crate we compile.
Instead, we will generate the `MIR` for every crate, and we will generate only one `goto-program` model.

> This model will only include items reachable from the target crate's harnesses.

Author: Totally. I put that as a future work for now. Let me know if you think this should be in the scope of the initial work.

> This model will only include items reachable from the target crate's harnesses.

Author: @danielsn is it OK if I leave it like this for the first version of the MIR Linker?

The current system flow for a crate verification is the following (Kani here represents either `kani | cargo-kani`
executable):

1. Kani compiles the user crate as well as all its dependencies.
   For every crate compiled, `kani-compiler` will generate a `goto-program` model.
   This model includes everything reachable from the crate's public functions.
2. After that, Kani links all models together by invoking `goto-cc`.
   This step will also link against Kani's `C` library.

> 3. For every harness, Kani prunes the linked model to only include items reachable from the given harness.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. For every harness, Kani invokes `goto-instrument` to prune the linked model to only include items reachable from the given harness.
```

> 4. Finally, Kani instruments and verify each harness model via `goto-program` and `cbmc` calls.

Reviewer 3: `goto-program` -> `goto-instrument`?

After this RFC, the system flow would be slightly different:

1. Kani compiles the user crate dependencies up to the `MIR` translation.

>    I.e., for every crate compiled, `kani-compiler` will generate an artifact that includes the `MIR` representation

Reviewer 2: "an artifact" is a bit vague. What? Something we put in the `rlib`?

Author: Yes. Either `rlib` or `rmeta`.

  of all items in the crate.
2. Kani will generate the `goto-program` only while compiling the target user crate.

>   It will generate one `goto-program` model that includes all items reachable from every harness in the target crate.

Author: It's a very important detail. Thanks!

3. `goto-cc` will still be invoked to link the generated model against Kani's `C` library.
4. Steps #3 and #4 above will be performed without any change.

This feature will require three main changes to Kani which are detailed in the sub-sections below.

### Kani's Sysroot

> Kani currently uses `rustup` sysroot to gather information from the standard library constructs.

Reviewer 3: I'm a bit unclear on this section. What standard library constructs are looked up in `sysroot`? Does `sysroot` have MIR lying around?

Author: Yes. The rustup sysroot does have MIR lying around. They are inside the *rlib files shipped with the toolchain (see more details here: https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/backend/libs-and-metadata.html#metadata).

Author: @zhassan-aws what kind of information would you like me to add here to make this more clear?

Reviewer 3: I think it's fine as is.

The artifacts from this `sysroot` include the `MIR` for generic items as well as for items that may be included in
a crate compilation (e.g.: functions marked with `#[inline]` annotation).
The artifacts do not include the `MIR` for items that have already been compiled to the `std` shared library.
This leaves a gap that cannot be filled by the `kani-compiler`;

> thus, we are unable to translate these items into `goto-program`.

Reviewer 2: `goto-program` doesn't seem like something that should be in code formatting here. "a goto program" I assume you mean?

Author: Yeah. I clearly did a poor job at code formatting. I'll fix that. :)

In order to fulfill this gap, we must compile the standard library from scratch.

> This RFC proposes a similar method to what [`MIRI`](https://github.com/rust-lang/miri) implements.

Reviewer 2: Can... we just use what MIRI ships?

We install a rust toolchain on install. I'd been thinking about whether we could reduce this to a minimal profile as an optimization, but we should also be able to go the other way and add the miri component?

Author: That's a great point. I'm assuming the overhead will be the same, but it might save us from maintaining yet another build script.

Let me investigate that.

Author: @tedinski please let me know your thoughts on this one.

Reviewer 2: Shucks, I was hoping MIRI would ship it. I'm ok with adding it as part of `setup` or pre-building it. Though I'm guessing MIRI doesn't pre-build it for a good reason?

Author: @oli-obk what's the motivation to build MIRI sysroot as part of the first execution of MIRI opposed to pre-building it?

Reviewer 4: miri can cross interpret, so we'd need to deploy all targets somewhere once (instead of once per host). Also sometimes you'll want to change how the sysroot is built I guess.

Also we need the ability to build the sysroot from scratch anyway for when we modify miri out of tree.

We will generate our own sysroot using the `-Z always-encode-mir` compilation flag.
This sysroot will be pre-compiled and included in our release bundle.

We will compile `kani`'s libraries (`kani` and `std`) also with `-Z always-encode-mir`
and with the new sysroot.

### Cross-Crate Reachability Analysis

`kani-compiler` will include a new `reachability` module to traverse over the local and external `MIR` items.

> This module will `monomorphize` all generic code as it's performing the traversal.

Author: That is a great question! Conceptually, I don't see any reason why the reachability code couldn't work with polymorphic definitions. If we decide to contribute this code to upstream or put in separate library, it would be a great thing to do.

For our current goal, it does make sense to monomorphize here since Kani's compiler just wants a list of items to generate code for.

> This module will `monomorphize` all generic code as it's performing the traversal.

Reviewer 5: Yes totally agree

> This module will `monomorphize` all generic code as it's performing the traversal.

Reviewer 4: rustc already has logic for this in https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/master/compiler/rustc_monomorphize/src/collector.rs

Maybe it could be generalized to allow you to plug into it and make it work cross crate (rustc only needs cross crate for generic functions and will assume nongeneric functions got codegened upstream)

We have for now given up on mir-only rlibs, but if we want to pick up that work, we'd need exactly what you are describing anyway, so it doesn't seem unreasonable to change the collector to support it optionally.

Author: That would be great! Most of the code I've written so far was based on the collector logic.

The traversal logic will be customizable allowing different starting points to be used.
The two options to be included in this RFC is starting from all local harnesses

> (tagged with `#[kani::proof]`) and all public functions in the local crate.

Reviewer 2: I assume that under `--test` tests are marked public and that keep them here?

I also wonder if we should just... include both by default and not have options here? This avoids the complication of setting/flags/configuration, doesn't seem like a major downside with slightly more code compiled, and makes everything more flexible.

E.g. a few minutes of thought comes up with the case of Rust calling C code and that C calling Rust code that's "extern C" and which we can't inspect the reachability of, but including both harnesses and public items both would handle seamlessly.

Author: @tedinski does that make sense? Let me know if you want me to change anything or make the text more clear about the customization points.

Reviewer 2: I'm fine with whichever course you choose, but my preference is that we should error on the side of simplicity here. IMO it should just use "public + harnesses" as roots and then we don't need to worry about other options. It seems like the worse case scenario is just codegen'ing a bit more than we need, while the advantage is that everything just works and nobody has to think about this again.

The `kani-compiler` behavior will be customizable via a new flag:

  ```
  --reachability=[ harnesses | pub_fns |  none | legacy* ]
  ```

where:

 - `harnesses`: Use the local harnesses as the starting points for the reachability analysis.

>  - `pub_fns`: Use the public local functions as the starting points for the reachability analysis.

Reviewer: Ok, I think the "modes" you referred to earlier are either "verification" or "assesment". And `pub_fns` corresponds to the "assesment" mode, while "harnesses" corresponds to "verification". Is that right?

 - `none`: This will be the default value if `--reachability` flag is not provided. It will basically skip

>  reachability analysis (and `goto-program` generation).

Reviewer: Well, goto-programs will still be generated, no?

Author: No. With `none` we won't generate any `goto-program`. This will be used while compiling the dependencies.

Author: @tedinski and @adpaco-aws I added a bit more information here. Let me know if that makes sense.

>    `kani-compiler` will still generate artifacts with the crate's `MIR`.

Reviewer 2: What is the use of none?

Author: While compiling the crate dependencies, we want to skip codegen completely. That's what "none" is for.

 - `legacy`: Keep `kani-compiler` current behavior by using
   `rustc_monomorphizer::collect_and_partition_mono_items()` which respects the crate boundary.
   This will generate a `goto-program` for each crate compiled by `kani-compiler`, and it will still have the same
   `std` linking issues.

*This option will be removed as part of the `rfc` stabilization.

These flags will not be exposed to the final user.
They will only be used for the communication between `kani-driver` and `kani-compiler`.

### Dependencies vs Target Crate Compilation

The flags described in the section above will be used by `kani-driver` to implement the new system flow.
For that, we propose the following mechanism:

- For standalone `kani`, we will pass the option `--reachability=harnesses` to `kani-compiler`.
- For `cargo-kani`, we will replace
  ```
  cargo build <FLAGS>
  ```

  with:

  ```

>   cargo rustc <FLAGS> -- --reachability=harnesses

Reviewer 2: What about when we run `cargo kani --tests`

Author: Great question. At some point I thought about adding this to the "Open Questions", but I totally forgot. I'll do that now.

I don't have a great answer yet. The two possibilities I thought so far are on the hacky side, but I believe they would work:

1. Add a new value to `--reachability`, maybe "on-tests" or something like that. This would behave as either "harness" or "none" depending whether RUSTFLAGS has `--tests`.
2. Change how we handle not having `--reachability` argument to also take into account the existence of `--tests`.

Both would ensure that we only run the reachability and codegen at the last compilation step. Any other suggestions?

Author: @tedinski any suggestions? I added this to the open questions too.

Reviewer 2: My question was less on the reachability side here, and more on the side of the actual pragmatics of doing the build.

`cargo build` becomes `cargo rustc` but what does `cargo test --no-run` become?

Author: It will likely stay as is and we might add a `--reachability=on-tests` or something like that.

Author: I have some great news, we can replace
```
cargo test --no-run
```
by
```
cargo rustc --tests -- --reachability=harnesses
```

I'll add some details here and remove that from the open questions.

Reviewer 2: Fantastic!

  ```

>   to build everything.

Reviewer 3: As far as I understand, we've been primarily using the `KANIFLAGS` environment variable to pass things to the `kani-compiler`? If this is correct, any reason to switch to using `cargo rustc`?

Author: The main reason is that we want to pass an extra flag to the target crate which we wouldn't pass to the dependencies.

Author: Unfortunately, this will still keep KANIFLAGS working as is today.

  This command will compile all dependencies without the `--reachability` argument, and it will only pass `harnesses`
  value to the compiler when compiling the target crate.

## Rational and Alternatives

Not doing anything is not an alternative, since this fixes a major gap in Kani's usability.

### Benefits

- The MIR linker will allow us to fix the linking issues with Rust's standard library.
- Once stabilized, the MIR linker will be transparent to the user.
- It will enable more powerful and precise static analysis to `kani-compiler`.
- It won't require any changes to our dependencies.
- This will fix the harnesses' dependency on the`#[no_mangle]` annotation
([Issue-661](https://github.com/model-checking/kani/issues/661)).

### Risks

Failures in the linking stage would not impact the tool soundness. I anticipate the following failure scenarios:
- ICE (Internal compiler error): Some logic is incorrectly implemented and the linking stage crashes.
  Although this is a bad experience for the user, this will not impact the verification result.

> - Missing items: This would either result in ICE during code generation or a verification failure if the missing

Reviewer 6: What about if its used as a potential function pointer?

Author: That's a great point. CBMC should catch that once the following PR gets merged: https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/pull/6987

Another possibility is to change how we invoke `--goto-instrument` as pointed out here: https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/issues/6983#issuecomment-1172020654

I created https://github.com/model-checking/kani/issues/1621 to address that issue and added to https://github.com/model-checking/kani/milestone/12

  item is reachable.
- Extra items: This shouldn't impact the verification results, and they should be pruned by CBMC's reachability

>   analysis.

Reviewer: CBMC could prune some stuff, but I don't think it's going to be more aggressive than the MIR linker.

Author: Indeed. CBMC formula slicer might prune more stuff than the MIR linker though.

  This is already the case today. In extreme cases, this could include a symbol that we cannot compile and cause an ICE.

The new reachability code would be highly dependent on the `rustc` unstable APIs, which could increase
the cost of the upstream synchronization.

> That said, the APIs that would be required are already used today.

Reviewer: Nice!

> That said, the APIs that would be required are already used today.

Reviewer 2: Any chance of upstreaming a clean API we could use?

Author: That's the hope. I added that to future work section, and it is the same feedback that @oli-obk provided. Fingers crossed!

Finally, this implementation relies on a few unstable options from `cargo` and `rustc`.
These APIs are used by other tools such as MIRI, so we don't see a high risk that they would be removed.

### Alternatives

The other options explored were:
1. Pre-compile the standard library and ship the generated `*symtab.json` files.
2. Pre-compile the standard library, convert them to `goto-programs` (via `symtab2gb`) and link them into

>    one single `goto-program` model. Ship the generated model.

Author: Huum... I think the process we would follow in these alternatives  would still be sound. We would still use the *rlib / *rmeta files that are included as part of the rustup toolchain sysroot which should have the layout information.

I guess I wasn't very clear here, and that's a great point. I didn't specify this here, but we would also need to include the metadata files for the Kani libraries in the sysroot, no matter what to keep it consistent.

Both alternatives are very similar. They only differ on the artifact that would be shipped.
They require generating and shipping a custom `sysroot`;
however, there is no need to implement the reachability algorithm.

We implemented a prototype for the MIR linker and one for the alternatives.
Both prototypes generate the sysroot as part of the `cargo kani` flow.

We performed a small experiment (on a `c5.4xlarge` ec2 instance running Ubuntu 20.04) to assess the options.

For this experiment, we used the following harness:
```rust
#[kani::proof]
#[kani::unwind(4)]
pub fn check_format() {
    assert!("2".parse::<u32>().unwrap() == 2);
}
```
The experiment showed that the MIR linker approach is much more efficient.

See the table bellow for the breakdown of time (in seconds) taken for each major step of
the harness verification:

| Stage                     | MIR Linker | Alternative |
----------------------------|------------|-------------|
| compilation               |   22.2s    |    64.7s    |
| `goto-program` generation |   2.4s     |    90.7s    |
| `goto-program` linking    |   0.8s     |    33.2s    |
| code instrumentation      |   0.8s     |    33.1     |

> | verification              |   0.5s     |    8.5s     |

Reviewer 3: The results are amazing! I'd expect memory usage to be significantly lower with the MIR linker as well.

If you still have the log files, can you compare the size of the SAT instance (clauses/literals) between the two alternatives? I'm curious to know how much CBMC's slicer is able to reduce the problem size, and how close it can get to the one generated by the MIR linker.

Author: Yeah, I totally forgot to include the memory usage here.

Both prototypes run the test described in CI. So you can see the log files for the CI run for [MIR linker](https://pipelines.actions.githubusercontent.com/serviceHosts/14dcd0bf-cf10-416a-af82-d1e50ea29e0a/_apis/pipelines/1/runs/620/signedlogcontent/10?urlExpires=2022-08-31T00%3A11%3A05.1747440Z&urlSigningMethod=HMACV1&urlSignature=5K%2B8bYQk7nidag1e9Ie3uz2aTF7j2OKVXm6oRVQ5C1Y%3D) and the [alternative](https://pipelines.actions.githubusercontent.com/serviceHosts/14dcd0bf-cf10-416a-af82-d1e50ea29e0a/_apis/pipelines/1/runs/622/signedlogcontent/5?urlExpires=2022-08-31T00%3A11%3A10.9310206Z&urlSigningMethod=HMACV1&urlSignature=S7i6ijOKpOYInWy6HTfBT3joP%2B3wQpluhdnDXFBdC1E%3D).

The specific data I believe you are asking for is:
```
14089 variables, 180 clauses
```
and 
```
21610 variables, 7514 clauses
```
for MIR Linker and the alternative, respectively.

It just occurred to me that I should try to check the difference under visualize. It might make it more clear to understand the difference.

It is possible that `goto-cc` time can be improved, but this would also require further experimentation and
expertise that we don't have today.

Every option would require a custom sysroot to either be built or shipped with Kani.
The table below shows the size of the sysroot files for the alternative #2
(`goto-program` files) vs compiler artifacts (`*.rmeta` files)
files with `-Z always-encode-mir` for `x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu` (on Ubuntu 18.04).

| File Type      | Raw size | Compressed size |
|----------------|----------|-----------------|
| `symtab.json`  |   950M   |     26M         |
| `symtab.out`   |   84M    |     24M         |
| `*.rmeta`      |   92M    |     25M         |

These results were obtained by looking at the artifacts generated during the same experiment.

## Open questions

> - Should we build or download the sysroot during `kani setup`?

Reviewer 6: How do we handle cases during development when we modify something the sysroot depends on

Author: During development, we shall build the sysroot together with all our binaries. I haven't figured out the best mechanism yet though. Building the sysroot as part of the `kani-compiler` build isn't quite working for me. The sysroot will require different cargo configuration, so I am considering splitting our workspace and creating a new workspace for the `library` folder.

Author: @danielsn Would you like me to add this information here? I tried to focus on the end user point of view, but it might make sense to clarify this.

- What's the best way to enable support to run Kani in the entire `workspace`?
  - One possibility is to run `cargo rustc` per package.

> - Should we codegen all static items no matter what? Static objects can only be initialized via constant function.

Reviewer 2: I think I said this out loud at one point, but writing it down:

YOLO. Let's try pruning "unused" statics and see what happens! It should be easy to mitigate (stop pruning statics) if we ever find a real issue, right?

Author: Yes. That's exactly what I'm doing. :)

  Thus, it shouldn't have any side effect.
  That relies on all constant initializers being evaluated during compilation.

## Future possibilities

> - Split `goto-program` models into two or more items to optimize compilation result caching.

Reviewer 3: A related question: are we perhaps able to skip re-generating the MIR for a dependent crate that hasn't changed, and reuse it in the following steps? `cargo build` (and hence `cargo kani`) sort of already does that when compiling a package, but we always run `symtab2gb` even if the symtab file hasn't changed.

Author: We would be able to skip re-generating the MIR for the dependencies but we would still generate the goto-program to everything linked at every compilation.

Being able to cache the goto-program generation for things that haven't changed would require more work and this is what I'm trying to capture here.

Reviewer 2: Splitting is one possibility, but IMO before we pursue any of that, we should take seriously optimizing the MIR -> Goto binary process. This would benefit initial as well as subsequent, and I think there's probably a LOT of low-hanging fruit.

Both in our compiler, symtab2gb, and the vague future possibility that we could emit goto binaries directly without going through json and symtab2gb.
